# Frantisek Stepan

František I. Štěpán Lotrinský (8. prosince 1708 Nancy – 18. srpna 1765 Innsbruck) byl lotrinský vévoda (1729–1736, jako František III.), těšínský kníže (1729–1765), toskánský velkovévoda (1737–1765, jako František II.) a císař Svaté říše římské (1745–1765). Se svou manželkou Marií Terezií byl zakladatelem habsbursko-lotrinské dynastie.

Rodná země Františka Štěpána, Lotrinsko, tvořila po celá staletí nárazníkové pásmo mezi Francií a říší Habsburků, neustále se ocitala ve válečném stavu a dynastie tak opakovaně přicházela o části svých území a zase je získávala zpět. Už za Leopolda Josefa Lotrinského došlo v zemi k částečné stabilizaci politické i hospodářské situace, potřebné reformy ale zavedl až František Štěpán, který převzal vládu nad vévodstvím, když mu bylo dvaadvacet let.

Své dětství a mládí strávil František Štěpán částečně na vídeňském dvoře. Manželem rakouské arcivévodkyně Marie Terezie se měl původně stát jeho starší bratr Clemens, který však zemřel na neštovice. Náhradníkem se proto stal František Štěpán, který byl u habsburského dvora oblíbený pro svou příjemnou povahu, pro kterou si ho vážili jak císař Karel VI., tak i jeho dcera Marie Terezie. Za souhlas se sňatkem Marie Terezie a Františka Štěpána požadovala Francie odstoupení Lotrinska ve svůj prospěch. Jako náhrada bylo mladému vévodovi poskytnuto Toskánsko, kde však stále vládla rodina Medici, a Lotrinčan tak musel nejprve více než rok čekat na smrt Giana Gastona Medici, jejího posledního příslušníka. Po tuto dobu bylo jediným územím, kterému František Štěpán vládl, Těšínské knížectví.

Už roku 1730 byl František Štěpán jmenován místodržitelem v Uhrách a sídlil v Prešpurku (dnes Bratislava). Poté se stal generálním guvernérem v Rakouském Nizozemí, ale tuto funkci nikdy nevykonával, a to i přesto, že pro něj byla zdrojem vydatných příjmů. Postupem času získával František Štěpán další funkce a úřady, avšak bez jakékoliv faktické moci, kterou držela pevně ve svých rukou jeho manželka, která zůstávala i titulárně jedinou paní Rakouska. Všechny snahy Františka Štěpána podílet se na státních záležitostech ztroskotaly.

Po nástupu Marie Terezie na trůn jej dekretem jmenovala svým spoluvladařem. 

Mladý František Štěpán byl svým tchánem Karlem VI. postaven do čela císařských vojsk během rakousko-turecké války v letech 1737–1739, když se Rakousko postavilo na stranu Ruského impéria v jeho válce proti Osmanské říši (1735–1739). Pro údajnou nevolnost ovšem bojiště opustil, velení přenechal hraběti Königseggovi a s manželkou Marií Terezií se uchýlil do Toskánska.[1]

Jistého vrcholu své politické kariéry dosáhl František Štěpán roku 1745, když byl korunován císařem Svaté říše římské. Pro něj však vysoký úřad císaře zůstal téměř jen titulem bez politického významu. Skutečnou vládkyní římskoněmecké říše se stala Marie Terezie, která získala titul císařovny odvozený od jejího postavení císařovy manželky.
 
V soukromém životě byl František Štěpán považován většinou současníků za příjemného a sympatického člověka. Byl skromný a dával přednost neokázalému měšťanskému stylu života. Vídeňská šlechta jej ale nikdy nepřijala za svého a až do konce jeho života mu dávala najevo, že je pro ni cizincem. Prezdivali mu “Francouzek” tedy maly Francouz.

František Štěpán pobuřoval své aristokratické okolí nechutí k dvorským ceremoniálům, chodil na tehdejší dobu nedbale oblečen a choval se zcela přirozeně, což bylo nepřijatelné. 

Vnucená zahálka vedla u něj zpočátku k frustraci a postupem času k tomu, že se začal věnovat dokonce hazardním hrám a stále častěji také svým milenkám. I přes časté žárlivé scény a spory ale bylo manželství Marie Terezie a Františka Štěpána považováno za poměrně šťastné a vzešlo z něj 16 dětí.

František Štěpán projevil v oblasti podnikání a obchodu mimořádné vlohy. Svého dědictví v Toskánsku se ujal roku 1739, stejně jako předtím v Lotrinsku se i zde pustil do radikálních reforem a zdejší zdevastované hospodářství přivedl k novému rozvoji. Toskánsko se stalo vydatným zdrojem příjmů do jeho osobní pokladny.

V roce 1743 zemřela falcká kurfiřtka Anna Marie Luisa Medicejská, poslední potomek rodu Medici, a František Štěpán jako její bratranec po ní získal ohromné dědictví. Své peníze ihned investoval a začal skupovat četná panství. Jeho nejvýznamnějším majetkem se staly Holíč a Šaštín na jihozápadě dnešního Slovenska. Podnikání na těchto svých panstvích se osobně a se zaujetím věnoval. V Holíči založil manufakturu na keramiku, čímž zahájil průmyslovou výrobu světoznámé holíčské keramiky. Postupem času zaměstnával na svých statcích a v manufakturách víc než deset tisíc zaměstnanců. V roce 1736 založil manufakturu na výrobu bavlněných a polobavlněných tkanin v Šaštíně a královský hřebčín v Kopčanech.

Byl zdatným obchodníkem a brzy převzal veškeré zásobování habsburské armády. V době prusko-rakouské, tzv. sedmileté války, zásoboval dokonce i armádu nepřítele, pruského krále Fridricha II., což považoval za obzvláště dobrý obchod. František Štěpán rovněž založil několik bank, centrálou jeho finančního impéria se stal tzv. Císařský dům ve Wallnerově ulici ve Vídni. Nakonec situace došla tak daleko, že František Štěpán půjčoval své soukromé peníze na vysoký úrok i habsburské státní pokladně, která byla ve finanční krizi. Díky tomu přenechala Marie Terezie svému manželovi v roce 1763 finanční správu země. Finanční situace habsburského soustátí se začala rychle stabilizovat, dalšímu pozitivnímu vývoji ale zabránila v roce 1765 Františkova smrt. Obrovský majetek, který František Štěpán po sobě zanechal, se stal základem soukromého majetku rodu Habsburků.

In the 1730s, Freemasonry spread across the European continent. Franz Stephan von Lothringen, the future husband of Maria Theresa and Holy Roman Emperor, also belonged to the Freemasons. He was accepted into The Hague in 1731 and soon afterwards made master in England. More is not known about his career as a Freemason, but the English could now count a powerful heir to the throne among their “brothers”.

## Zednar

Iniciovan bud v Anglii, Bruselu nebo Haagu. NEbo: Iniciovan v Haagu a Mistrovsky stupen ziskal v anglii. To vse jako rakousky diplomat behem sve diplomaticke cesty do Holandska, Belgie a Anglie ve sluzbach rakouska.

Byl Velmistrem ve Vidni, podporoval zakladani novych Lozi. 

Josef II - po otci tolerantni k zednarum, postavil zednarstvi pod svou ochranu, rozvoj zednarstvi v Rakousku i v Praze (1785 UStav pro hluchoneme hrabe Kunigl, Soukroma spolecnost nauk - baron Ignac vo Born, pozdeji Kralovska ceska spolecnost nauk)

The stay in Brussels was of decisive importance. There Franz Stephan was appointed to a Masonic lodge in June 1731 He received the degrees customary at the time and was awarded with familiarized with the Masonic principles of freedom, equality, fraternity, tolerance and humanity. During his stay in England, he then accepted in November and December Work in Masonic lodges, which at that time were intensively involved in The promotion of the sciences, and has been developed in the Master's degree. The English Grand Lodge felt as a result highly honored. It brought the health of the "Brother Lorraine" long as an official toast and also named a lodge after him. Although he is committed to the ideas of the Freemasons and felt connected to the burgeoning Enlightenment later, there are no evidence that he was later a member of a lodge in Vienna would have been

Austria is celebrating its 300th birthday in these May days, as it should be. It is all the more quiet about Maria Theresa's husband Franz Stephan (1708 to 1765), after all the progenitor of the Habsburg-Lothringen dynasty. Wrongly. Because the judgments of posterity do not apply. He had been portrayed as insignificant and lacking in energy, always in an unfair comparison to his wife, who admittedly had to bear an incomparably greater burden of rulership. But Franz Stephan, from November 1740 co-regent in the Habsburg hereditary lands and from 1745 as Franz I Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, was not only a well-educated personality for the time, but also the financial manager of the family into which he had married. His palace on Vienna's Wallnerstrasse was the headquarters of an economic empire that was more splendid in the world than the Habsburg Empire itself. He was not only a happy family man - with changing amours by the way - he was also an heir who knew what to do with the blessing of money.

Lorraine's interest in innovations of all kinds is well known. He had an open ear (and also the necessary capital) for new ideas all over Europe, for new machines that could be used in mines or in the rapidly emerging factories.

———

**Keyword 'Franz Stephan von Lothringen' in the International Freemason Lexicon by Eugen Lennhoff and Oskar Posner (1932)**

Franz Stephan von Lothringen, as German Emperor (1745) Franz I, born 1706, died 1765, son of the Turkish victor Karl v. Lorraine, was educated at the Austrian court and by Charles VI. destined to be the husband of Maria Theresa. During the war with France he lost his duchy, which Stanislaus Leseinski fell to the father-in-law of Louis XV. In return, he received the entitlement to the Grand Duchy of Tuscany, which he took possession of after the death of the last Medici in 1737. Appointed by the emperor as generalissimo of the army against the Turks, he probably showed a great deal of personal courage, but little strategic talent. In 1736 he married Maria Theresa. After the death of Charles VI. Maria Theresa set his imperial coronation in Frankfurt a. M. through.

In 1731 he undertook on behalf of his future father-in-law Charles VI. a trip to Holland, England and Prussia, which was certainly of a political nature. Here he met the English ambassador Ph. D. Stanhope, Earl of Chesterfield, the author of the well-known "Letters to My Son", who had to make the preparations for the visit to England and who probably also accepted Franz of Lorraine in the Freemasons' Union. The admission took place at the beginning of June 1731 in The Hague, whereby Dr. Desaguliers was specially sent by the Grand Lodge of London. Desaguliers, John Stanhope, Holtzendorff as grand overseer and other Freemasons were present, including the Envoy Stanhope and a Dutch brother, Anderson wrote in his story in 1738 that the Duke was promoted to Entered Prentice and Fellow Craft, that is, he received all the degrees customary at the time.

During his stay in England he attended a lodge in Houghton Hall with Grand Master Lord Lovell (between November 4th and 11th), and on Friday, December 4th, 1731, he visited the Masonic lodge in the Devils Tavern near Temple Bar) and received the master's degree from the Norwich "	" in the country house of the great statesman Walpole in Norfolk. He left England on December 9th.

These are the certain data about the Masonic activity of Lorraine. The fact that the Hamburg brothers greeted him on the occasion of his coronation as emperor with a poem by their brother Alardus is proof that he was honored as a brother in the brotherhood. Likewise, that the English grand lodge for a long time still used the official toast of Brother Lorraine as an official toast. A box was also named after him.

What else is reported about his masonry activity is unprovable. He is said to have stopped the Masonic persecution triggered by the papal cops in Tuscany. He is not mentioned in the files of the Aux Trois Canons lodge in Vienna. It probably belongs to the field of invention that he held a box in the Vienna Hofburg and that Maria Theresa, out of jealousy and female curiosity, had the box "Aux trois canons" blown up.

It was repeatedly asserted and also presented in a novel and dramatic manner (Sacher-Masoch et al.) That Maria Theresa in male clothing was involved in the abolition of the lodge. The fact that the high dignitaries and officers arrested during this act of violence got off very lightly is said to be due to his influence. Maria Theresa knew that her husband was Mason. That did not prevent them from issuing sharp edicts against Freemasonry. Franz von Lorraine is also said to have softened the punishment of the Prague aristocrats and traitors. Here, too, doubts are justified, because Maria Theresa was also politically prudent in rebellious Upper Austria.

The Duke's Freemason career was apparently ended with his stay in England. In the later years of his life, Franz von Lothringen paid homage to markedly alchemical tendencies, without, however, coming into connection with the Masonic variant of this intellectual failure. His alchemists were far from Freemasonry. His influence on Freemasonry is often overestimated, especially by the Freemasons. In contrast to his contemporary Frederick the Great, who was a sympathetic Freemason, Franz von Lothringen probably came into the covenant less from an inner urge than more by chance. One does not go wrong if one sees in his recording a social event staged by Stanhope, which was intended to give the young grand lodge respect and the possibility of more intimate social relations at a court foreign to him. (End of lexicon text)

—

The picture on the left from 1755 shows the imperial couple with their children: there were 16 (sixteen!), Six of whom died as small children or in their teens. The baby in the middle is Marie Antoinette, who later lived in Paris during the French Revolution as Queen and Consort of Louis XVI. was beheaded (1793).

Even if Franz Stephan had some affairs, the two had a good marriage: Maria Theresia seems to have loved her 'Franzl' very much. Much less she valued the newly emerging Freemasonry. Lennhoff-Posner said she knew that her husband had been accepted by the Freemasons. But that should not have been particularly important to either her or him; hence in the subtitle above the "Freemason" under quotation marks.

The eldest son to the left of Maria Theresa is the later Emperor Joseph II: enlightened, thoroughly Masonic-friendly, and yet at the end of 1785 he felt compelled to issue a Masonic patent to regulate the Masonic wild growth.

By the way: Even if Maria Theresa, who is still popular today as a historical figure in Austria, is called Empress ... it was not: She was Archduchess and regent of the Habsburg home countries and the wife of an emperor.

The painting hangs in the Palace of Versailles near Paris. It is from Martin van Meytens

https://freimaurer-wiki.de/index.php/Franz_Stephan_von_Lothringen

**Freimaurerei in Österreich von Franz Stephan von Lothringen bis heute. Von Peter Back-Vega**

At that time  he was not yet married to Maria Theresa and was far from being a German emperor. In 1731 he was a diplomat in the Habsburg service. At that time France and the Vatican were trying to recapture the English throne of the Catholic Stuarts, and England was trying to establish an axis with the Habsburgs on the continent. These efforts were reinforced by the establishment of close personal contacts through Freemasonry. In short: Franz Stephan was admitted to the Bund in The Hague in 1731 and made a journeyman and master in England the following year.

This process is of particular importance in connection with the first papal condemnation of the covenant, which was addressed directly to the Duke of Tuscany (to Franz Stephan), but was not further disseminated by him. Franz Stephan remained a de facto Freemason until 1765 without leaving any further traces. His son-in-law, Albert von Sachsen-Teschen, Albert Sasko Tesinsky.  married to Maria Christina, Maria Theresa's favorite daughter, and adoptive father of both Archduke Karl and Archduke Johann, was a Freemason to the highest degree. No membership is known of any of the other Habsburgs and their immediate relatives.

In 1742 the first lodge on Austrian soil, “Aux Trois Canons”, started its work in Vienna. The lingua franca of the upscale estates, especially if you had something exclusive and discreet to share, was French: the Trois Canons are not three cannons, but the three rules of conduct that are urgently recommended to every seeker upon admission: "Know yourself!" - "Rule yourself!" - "Refine yourself!"

“Aux Trois Canons” was deployed from Breslau in Vienna in 1742 and after six months had 49 members. As we can see in the painting “Mozart in the Lodge”, which was made much later, clergymen (here prelate and monk) were definitely present during the work - the papal condemnation was apparently primarily intended to prevent its own staff from being free-thinking and with religious tolerance Life.

Until the end of the century, this threat had little effect. A number of lodges arose in the cities, but also in many castles such as in Rosenau. They did not all belong to that one association which was recognized as "regular" by the Grand Lodge of England. Here, as in all of Europe, various high-grade systems were established. These are communities that, building on the three Masonic degrees of apprentice, journeyman and master, celebrated the most varied of "deepenings" and "heights" (through titles).

When in 1776 the Illuminati wanted to develop the actual core of Freemasonry into an order of virtue and reason, with the noble intention of soaking social and political life ideologically that no further exercise of power would be necessary, this spirit also had an effect on Viennese Freemasonry the end. At that time of the High Enlightenment, the Lodge on True Unity formed an intellectual spearhead under its master from the chair Ignaz von Born. Following the example of the Royal Society (which has shaped many London lodges), all possible concerns of science, history (including the Egyptian mysteries), the state and morality were dealt with in the weekly 'papers'. The intellectual charisma of these lodge meetings was so strong that Emperor Joseph II, who was inclined towards the Enlightenment but was nevertheless absolutist, was forced to issue a 'patent' in 1785. Freemasonry is not prohibited here, but its independence is so severely restricted that after the merging of the various lodges in Vienna into only two, and the ban on all 'corner' and palace lodges as well as all international affiliations, initially only about 1000 Freemasons more around 300 remained. Incidentally, Mozart remained loyal to the Bund until his death in 1791. In 1793 the lodges themselves decide to dissolve them.

Franz II. (Until 1806 German Emperor, from 1804 as Franz I Emperor of Austria), who saw his aunt, Marie Antoinette, end up on the guillotine in 1793, was easy to convince that the Freemasons were only "to blame" for the French Revolution was. As a 'Jacobin' they were then persecuted, imprisoned and finally banned in 1795 by a 'criminal patent'.

——————

**Franz Stephan: promoter of science and financial genius**

Maria Theresa's husband was a very progressive mind who brought many cultural and intellectual impulses with him from his Western European homeland.

Thanks to Franz Stephan, the French element strengthened at the Viennese court. The private correspondence of the members of the Maria Theresa family, for example, is predominantly written in French with interspersed German words, often in the Viennese dialect.

The Lorraine formed a bridge to the Western European intellectual world, where the Enlightenment was in full bloom and the "Encyclopedic Age" had begun. Franz Stephan was accessible to the new currents and had a rational worldview. Significantly, he was also a member and sponsor of the secret society of Freemasons. This association, which was very popular at the time among the liberal elites of Europe, wanted to build a new society in the spirit of humanism and free people from the shackles of denominational intolerance and feudal oppression.

Since Franz Stephan was only loosely involved in the reign of his wife, he created his own empire in the "Kaiserhaus", a palace on Wallnerstrasse in Vienna. There he could pursue his scientific interests undisturbed. A laboratory, a library and rooms for his collection were available to him. This institution, known at the time as the Natural History Cabinet, formed the cornerstone for the later Natural History Museum in Vienna.

The emperor gathered here a self-contained society of scientists, engineers and artists from all over Europe. About him came, inter alia. Gérard van Swieten in 1745 as an imperial personal physician to Vienna. The reform of the Viennese university and court library goes back to van Swieten, and he laid the foundation stone for the upswing of the Viennese medical school, which was to achieve international recognition in the 19th century.

Franz Stephan's work has been preserved most tangibly in Schönbrunn to this day. A part of the park was not designed according to aesthetic, representative standards, but as an image of the regulating gaze of reason on the supposed chaos of nature. In 1752 Franz Stephan founded the Schönbrunn Zoo, the oldest still existing zoological garden in Europe. The following year the botanical garden was created, which was tellingly called the Dutch Garden: the Dutchman Adrian van Steckhoven was its first director. To obtain exotic plants and animals, he had a Caribbean expedition from 1754–1759 under the direction of Nikolaus Joseph von Jacquin. The Kaiser was personally involved in all of these projects and was well informed.

Another interesting trait in Franz Stephan's personality is his economic talent, which enabled him to build up a large personal fortune in a short period of time. He bought goods in Lower Austria, Hungary and Moravia. In the Austrian part of Silesia he was already by his father-in-law Karl VI. enfeoffed with the Duchy of Teschen. On his Upper Hungarian domains of Holitsch and Sassin, he created an example of an early industrial empire thanks to profitable manufacturers of textiles and ceramics.

Thanks to his wealth, he was able to grant loans to Maria Theresa and the constantly exhausted treasury. He also benefited from major orders from the Austrian army administration. Rumors that he illegally enriched himself due to excessive prices or even supplied Prussia cannot be verified.

After Franz Stephan's death, the enormous property complex formed the cornerstone for the Habsburg Family Fund, a foundation to provide for non-ruling members of the family. The financial assets were largely used by his son and successor Joseph II to repay the national debts that had accumulated during the Seven Years' War.

Fridrich II  During a dinner in 1738, his father, King Frederick William I, made derogatory remarks about Freemasonry and all secret societies on a trip to the Rhine. Count Albrecht Wolfgang zu Schaumburg-Lippe disagreed and openly professed Freemasonry. The Count will probably have explained that Freemasonry is an activity of selected men who work for the good of mankind using symbolic forms, mostly borrowed from masonry and architecture, by seeking to refine themselves and others morally in order to bring about a general covenant of humanity, which they already represent among themselves on a small scale. Frederick saw his views strengthened by this table discussion and was so impressed that he expressed to the Count the wish to become a Free Wall.

Under number 31, the membership directory of the Loge d'Hambourg registered "Friedrich von Preussen, b. 24 Jan. 1712, Kronprinz". The date of admission is given: 14/15 August 1738 in Braunschweig. The Remarks column merely states: d. August 17, 1786. Later, Frederick the Great himself held a lodge, took up the free wall himself and took over the protectorate over the lodges in his provinces. He remained attached to Freemasonry for a lifetime and opened his states to Freemasonry, which rapidly spread Freemasonry to Germany.
