---
related: ""
---
# L1Z1

L1Z1

Best action for Taking planets from other people

OVERALL GOALS: we want automatically gain tech VPs. Accomplish combat focused Secrets. Be “smart aggressive”, take planets for VPs, not necessarily hold them. Get stuff and score points if you are sure the opponent can not strike back.

Dont overexpand. Have a standard opening. Lz1x is a mid game race

Dont spend all command counters in round 1 or 2

Good at secret objectives ,- take Imperial sometimes

Good at taking planets (not holding) - so, take a planet for VP and than dont try to necessarily hold them
	
Use aggression to get VP. Dont spend money for fleets and start attacking people without gaining VPa

Don't go for inheritance in early game, Instead :

Antimass -> Gravity Drive -> Sarveen ->  Dreadnought II ->  Inheritance Systems

Aim to have good fleet by ROUND 3 having Dread II. we need to have good round 3.

Make people pay you for not attacking them - money, support for the throne, promisory notes (trade agreement)

You can sell promisory note for money to people whoo need stategy tokens

Pie Slice - you want some influence (you start with 5/0), yellow skip (for inheritance), blue skip (for Gravity)

Expand to weaker players

Strategy cards:

	Tech - get 2 technologies, replenish planet with dipl secondary or get trade. Its not worth If Im not able to get 2 resources. No secondary need. Maybe Diplo and warfare to build something.
	

	Politics - to get action cards and and play tech in 2nd round. You can avoid tech secondary if there is no tech objective and build a fleet (warfare secondary) instead with.		
			Possibly triple expand by building another dreadnought and 2 ground forces and expand. but its risky. its worth if Im surrounded by high resource planets.

	Trade - Buy tech as secondary a star build fleet

	Diplomacy - replenish and build a fleet

ROUND 4: Get inheritance

with inheritance - Look at the board and research a tech which can help me this round. Unit upgrade (cruiser, fighter), maybe War Sun (only for late game gambit - to break planetary shield). maybe X-89 weapons

Makes sense to take Imperial to get secret objective.

LATE GAME - may go for Mecatol, capture their Space dock, build a fleet

Counters: we counters fighetr factions like Naalu, Saar, Muaat, Xxca, Sol, Arborec

PDSs are very annoying for us - Mentak (number one fear for all bad guys), Xcha, Jol-nar.

No sense to fight against Barony. If neighbours, make alliance and split galaxy

